Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will cover standard ACLs,
access control lists.
I’ll be splitting up ACLs into two days,
this video and the next one, Day 35, which
will cover another kind of ACL.
ACLs are in the exam topics under section
5, security fundamentals.
Specifically, topic 5.6, which says you must
be able to configure and verify access control
lists.
It doesn’t specify IPv4 or IPv6, but for
the CCNA you just have to learn IPv4 ACLs.
Perhaps later I’ll make an extra video introducing
IPv6 ACLs, but currently it’s not necessary
for the CCNA.
Here’s what we’ll cover in today’s video.
First, what are ACLs?
I’ll introduce their basic purpose.
I’ll talk about ACL logic, how they are
actually processed by the router.
I’ll introduce the basic types of ACLs on
Cisco routers.
After that I’ll show you how to configure
two kinds of ACLs, standard numbered ACLs
and standard named ACLs.
As always, watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus question from Boson ExSim for
CCNA, the best practice exams for the CCNA,
and in my opinion the best tool to get ready
for the CCNA exam.
So, what are ACLs?
ACLs, Access Control Lists, actually have
multiple uses.
The name ‘access control’ tells us that
they control access to the network.
For example, Host A should be allowed to access
Server A, but Host B should not be allowed
to access Server A. In Day 34, this video,
and Day 35 we will focus on ACLs from a security
perspective.
So, like I just said, controlling which devices
have access to which parts of the network.
However, although that is the main purpose
of ACLs, that’s not the only purpose.
Later in the course you’ll see some other
uses of ACLs.
But for now, we’ll focus on ACLs from a
security perspective, controlling who has
access to different parts of the network.
So, when using ACLs in this way, ACLs function
as a packet filter, instructing the router
to permit or discard specific traffic.
As you know, if a router receives a packet
and it has a route to the packet’s destination,
it will by default forward the packet according
to its routing table.
However ACLs let us control that.
Even if the router has a route to the destination,
the packet might be discarded if the ACL tells
the router to do so.
ACLs can filter traffic based on the source
and destination IP addresses, source and destination
Layer 4 port numbers, etc.
For the CCNA, we’ll just focus on those
two, IP addresses and port numbers, but you
can get more advanced with ACLs also.
Okay, I think showing you will make things
easier to understand than just explaining.
So, we have two routers, R1 and R2, with a
point-to-point connection.
The 192.168.1.0/24 network is connected to
R1, and I’ve shown a couple PCs in the network,
PC1 and PC2.
Notice that, instead of including a switch
in the diagram and showing the PCs connected
to the switch, I represent the network segment
like this.
This is common in network diagrams.
In reality, all of the PCs in the 192.168.1.0/24
network are connected to a switch, and the
switch is connected to R1, but we don’t
actually have to include the switch in this
diagram.
The 192.168.2.0/24 network, with PC3 and PC4,
is also connected to R1.
The 10.0.1.0/24 network, with SRV1, is connected
to R2, and the 10.0.2.0/24 network, with SRV2,
is also connected to R2.
I’ll use this network to demonstrate how
ACLs work.
So, without looking at the actual configurations
yet, let’s build an ACL so you can see how
they work.
We shouldn’t just configure ACLs randomly,
we must use them to achieve a certain requirement.
For example, let’s say the network policy
is that hosts in 192.168.1.0/24 should be
able to access the 10.0.1.0/24 network.
They should be able to access files on SRV1,
for example.
However, hosts in the 192.168.2.0/24 network
should not be able to access 10.0.1.0/24.
PC3 and PC4, for example, should not be able
to access files on SRV1.
How can we use ACLs to achieve this?
First up, ACLs are configured globally on
the router, in global config mode.
ACLs are made up of an ordered sequence of
ACEs, access control entries.
For example, to fulfill our requirement, we
could configure ACL 1 like this on R1 or R2.
ACE 1 says if source IP equals 192.168.1.0/24,
then permit the packet, let the router forward
it.
ACE 2 says if source IP equals 192.168.2.0/24,
deny the traffic.
ACE 3 says that all other traffic should be
permitted.
The order of these entries is very important,
but I’ll talk more about that later.
Configuring an ACL in global config mode will
not make the ACL take effect.
After being created, the ACL must be applied
to an interface.
ACLs are applied either inbound or outbound.
Let’s see how that works.
Here’s that same ACL as before.
Let’s say we configured it on R1.
So it has been created, but it hasn’t been
applied yet.
Let’s walk through some examples of applying
ACL 1 to different interfaces in different
directions.
Once again, here are the requirements.
Depending on which interface we apply the
ACL to, and which direction we apply it in,
we will either succeed in meeting the requirements
or fail.
For example, what if we applied it outbound
on G0/2.
That means it will only take effect on traffic
exiting G0/2.
Does that fulfill the requirements?
The answer is no, it doesn’t fulfill the
requirement.
Why not?
Because R1 will only use the ACL to filter
traffic exiting G0/2, not entering it.
If PC3 tries to ping SRV1, when the ping reaches
R1 it won’t even check the ACL, because
the traffic is entering G0/2, not exiting
it.
So, R1 will forward the traffic to R2, which
will forward it to SRV1.
Now, when SRV1 sends the reply to PC3, R1
will check the ACL to decide if the traffic
should be forwarded out of G0/2 or not.
It will check the entries of ACL1 in sequence.
If source IP = 192.168.1.0/24.
Well, the source is SRV1, so that doesn’t
apply.
If source IP = 192.168.2.0/24.
That doesn’t apply either, the source is
not in that subnet.
So, R1 reaches the last entry which says permit
all other traffic, so it forwards the reply
to PC3.
PC3 was able to access SRV1, even though hosts
in 192.168.2.0/24 shouldn’t be able to.
Clearly, we didn’t apply this ACL correctly.
What if we applied the ACL inbound on G0/2?
That means R1 will check the ACL for all traffic
entering G0/2.
So, if PC3 tries to ping SRV1, R1 will check
the ACL.
Once again, it will check the entries in order,
from top to bottom.
If source IP = 192.168.1.0/24.
The source isn’t in that subnet, so it checks
the next entry.
If source IP = 192.168.2.0/24.
The source is 192.168.2.1, which is in 192.168.2.0/24,
so there’s a match!
That means that R1 will take the specified
action, which is deny.
So, R1 drops the traffic, it doesn’t forward
the packet.
Once a router finds a match and takes an action,
it stops checking the other entries in the
ACL, so this ‘permit all other traffic’
is ignored.
So, does this fulfill our requirements?
Yes and no.
192.168.1.0/24 will be able to access 10.0.1.0/24
no problem, there is no ACL stopping them
from communicating.
Also, hosts in 192.168.2.0/24 are prevented
from accessing 10.0.1.0/24, as you just saw
R1 dropped the traffic from PC3.
However, by applying the ACL inbound on G0/2
we are being too restrictive.
This blocks hosts in 192.168.2.0/24 from communicating
with all other networks outside of their local
LAN.
PC3 and PC4 can communicate with each other,
but that’s it.
So, this is not the best way to apply this
ACL.
There are some other possibilities we could
try, such as applying it to R1’s G0/0 or
R2’s G0/0, but let’s take a look at the
best option.
The best location to place this ACL is outbound
on R2’s G0/1 interface.
Let’s see how it works.
If PC3 tries to ping SRV1, R2 will check the
ACL before forwarding the packet out of its
G0/1 interface.
The first entry says if source IP equals 192.168.1.0/24
then permit, but the source isn’t in that
subnet.
So R2 checks the next entry.
If source IP is in 192.168.2.0/24, then deny.
The source is in that subnet, so the packet
will be denied and R2 will not forward it.
So, that satisfies the second requirement,
hosts in 192.168.2.0/24 can’t access 10.0.1.0/24.
What if PC1, in 192.168.1.0/24, tried to ping
SRV1?
Before forwarding the packet out of its G0/1
interface, R2 will check the ACL.
If the source IP is in 192.168.1.0/24, then
permit.
The source is 192.168.1.1, so the packet is
permitted and R2 forwards it to SRV1.
Both requirements have been satisfied, and
there is no effect on other traffic.
I hope that demonstration helped you understand
what an ACL is and how they work.
If you’re still a little confused, don’t
worry.
Let me explain a little more about some of
the things I just mentioned.
So, ACLs are configured in global config mode,
but then you must apply it to an interface.
When applying it to an interface, you specify
a direction.
This tells the router to either check packets
that enter the interface, or check packets
that exit the interface.
ACLs are made up of one or more ACEs, access
control entries.
When the router checks a packet against the
ACL, it processes the ACEs in order, from
top to bottom.
I just showed you this.
For example here in ACL 1, the router will
check if the packet’s source is in 192.168.1.0/24,
then it will check if the packet’s source
is in 192.168.2.0/24, and if it doesn’t
match either of those it will permit it.
Another point I briefly mentioned before,
if the packet matches one of the entries in
the ACL, the router takes the action and stops
processing the ACL.
All entries below the matching entry will
be ignored.
Let me show you an example.
Here we have a router and another ACL.
The first entry in the ACL says if source
IP = 192.168.1.0/24, then permit.
However the second entry says if source IP
= 192.168.0.0/16, then deny.
What effect will this have if applied outbound
on the G0/0 interface of this router?
If a packet with a source IP of 192.168.1.1
arrives on G0/1, before forwarding the packet
out of G0/0 the router will check it against
the ACL.
The source is 192.168.1.1, which matches the
first entry, so the router will forward the
packet as normal.
This second entry will simply be ignored.
Now I’ve reversed entries 1 and 2 in ACL
2.
What will the effect be if the same packet
is received by the router?
It will once again check ACL 2 before forwarding
the packet.
The first entry tells the router to deny the
packet, so it will be discarded, not forwarded
out of the interface.
Entry 2, which tells the router to permit
that packet, is ignored.
So, I think you can see how important the
order of the entries in an ACL is.
Now, here’s one more point about ACLs.
A maximum of one ACL can be applied to a single
interface per direction.
So, one inbound ACL is allowed and one outbound
ACL is allowed, for a maximum of two ACLs.
If you apply a second ACL to an interface
in the same direction as another one, it will
replace the previous one.
Next up, another important part of ACLs, the
‘implicit deny’.
Here’s a question.
What happens if a packet doesn’t match any
of the entries in an ACL?
So, here’s the same ACL, and the same router.
This time the router receives a packet with
source IP 10.0.0.1.
Before forwarding it out of G0/0, the router
checks it against the ACL. 10.0.0.1 doesn’t
match the first entry.
And it doesn’t match the second entry either.
So, what happens?
The answer is, the router will deny the packet,
it will not forward it.
This is what we call the ‘implicit deny’.
Even though there is no entry in the ACL telling
the router to deny the packet, it’s like
there is an invisible entry at the end, if
source IP = any, then deny.
This is true for all ACLs.
To summarize this point, there is an implicit
deny at the end of all ACLs.
This tells the router to deny all traffic
that doesn’t match any of the configured
entries in the ACL.
Always be aware of the implicit deny when
configuring ACLs, or you might deny traffic
that you didn’t want to deny.
Now that you have an idea of the basic operations
of ACLs, let me introduce the different types
of ACLs you will learn about in today’s
video and in Day 35.
There are two main types of ACLs, and those
two types have two sub-types.
The first type are standard ACLs, these match
based on source IP address only, so they are
quite simple.
The two types of standard ACLs are standard
numbered ACLs, which are identified with a
number like 1, 2, etc.
And there are also standard named ACLs, which
are identified with a name.
There are also differences in how you configure
numbered and named ACLs, but we’ll get to
that later.
In addition to standard ACLs, there are also
extended ACLs.
These are more complex and can match based
on source and/or destination IP address, source
and/or destination port numbers, as well as
some other things.
Like standard ACLs, there are numbered and
named versions of extended ACLs, too.
As I said in the beginning of the video, today
we’ll focus on standard ACLs.
All of the examples so far have been standard
ACLs, filtering packets only based on their
source IP address.
In Day 35 I’ll tell you all about extended
ACLs, but now let’s learn some more about
standard ACLs and then see how to actually
configure them.
So let’s get into standard numbered ACLs.
As I just mentioned, standard ACLs match traffic
based only on the source IP address of the
packet.
So, standard ACLs are quite simple.
The router doesn’t check the destination
IP, the source Layer 4 port, the destination
port, etc.
It just looks at the source IP address of
the packet and decides to forward or block
it.
Numbered ACLs are identified with a number.
You can, of course, configure multiple ACLs
on a single router, so you need to identify
each ACL.
Numbered ACLs use a number like ACL 1, ACL
2, etc.
There are also named ACLs, which I’ll introduce
later.
Here’s an important point.
Different types of ACLs have a different range
of numbers that can be used.
Standard ACLs can use 1 to 99 and 1300 to
1999.
Originally, standard ACLs could only use 1
to 99, meaning you could have a maximum of
99 standard ACLs on a single router.
Later this was expanded to include 1300 to 1999.
So, you can’t configure a standard ACL with
the number 100, for example.  The number has
to be in one of these ranges.
Here are a bunch of different ACL types, and
the different number ranges that identify
them.
You don’t have to memorize all of these,
of course.
For now, just remember the standard ACL ranges,
1 to 99 and 1300 to 1999, listed as ‘Standard
IP’ ACLs in this chart.
‘IP ACL’ is the type of ACL you have to
learn for the CCNA.
I just wanted to show you that there are lots
of different types of ACLs, and each have
their own range of numbers.
Here’s the basic command to configure a
standard numbered ACL.
ACCESS-LIST, followed by the number.
We’re configuring standard ACLs, so this
number must be in the range 1 to 99 or 1300
to 1999.
Then you specify either deny or permit, and
then the IP address and wildcard mask to match
against.
Hopefully you remember wildcard masks from
the EIGRP and OSPF videos.
Don’t try to use a standard subnet mask
when configuring ACLs.
So, this is how you configure a single entry
in access-list 1.
Here are some examples.
ACCESS-LIST 1 DENY 1.1.1.1 0.0.0.0.
So, this denies 1.1.1.1/32, meaning only 1.1.1.1,
a single host.
Now, when you specify a /32 mask in an ACL,
you don’t actually have to specify the wildcard
mask.
You can just specify 1.1.1.1, and the router
will understand that it’s /32.
So, these are just two different ways of configuring
the exact same thing.
Now, there is one more method of configuring
a /32 entry.
It’s considered an old method, but it still
works on modern routers.
To specify a single host, you can use the
HOST keyword before the IP address.
Again, in effect this is exactly the same
as the previous two, it’s just a different
way of configuring it.
So, all three of these are the same in effect.
Note that the 2nd and 3rd options here can
only be used for /32, to specify a single
host.
If you’re matching a /24 network, for example,
you’ll have to use the 1st option, you have
to specify the wildcard mask of 0.0.0.255.
Okay, so let’s say we used one of those
options to configure an entry in ACL 1 that
blocks 1.1.1.1/32.
If we leave the ACL as is, all other traffic
will be blocked, too, because of the implicit
deny.
So, let’s make another entry in this ACL
to permit traffic.
Here it is.
ACCESS-LIST 1 PERMIT ANY.
This tells the router to permit all traffic,
with any source IP.
Now, here’s a quiz.
The ANY keyword is convenient, but how can
we specify an IP address and wildcard mask
that has the same effect?
Pause the video and think about it, what IP
address and wildcard mask matches all addresses?
Okay, the answer is 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255,
which is 0.0.0.0/0, and matches all addresses.
So, these two options are exactly the same.
As you can see, ACL configuration can be quite
flexible.
In these examples I’ll use a variety of
methods so you can be aware of all of them,
but feel free to pick your favorite and just
use that.
‘ANY’, for example, is much quicker to
type than 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255.
Finally, here’s one more thing you can configure
for an ACL, a remark.
This is like an interface description.
It doesn’t have any effect on the ACL, it’s
just a description that helps you remember
the purpose of the ACL when looking at it
in the configuration.
Note that the command is ACCESS-LIST 1 REMARK,
followed by the remark.
The hashtags, or pound symbols, whatever you
call them, aren’t a necessary part of the
command.
I just use them to make it easier to see when
looking at the config.
Okay, so I tried actually configuring that
ACL, let’s check it out.
For both the deny and permit entries I decided
to enter the whole IP address and wildcard
mask.
Then I used SHOW ACCESS-LISTS, which displays
all ACLs on the router.
There are a few things to point out here.
First up, notice that the router automatically
converted DENY 1.1.1.1 0.0.0.0 to just DENY
1.1.1.1.
The router does this when you use a /32 mask.
Also, PERMIT 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255 was automatically
converted to PERMIT ANY.
You probably also noticed that the remark
isn’t displayed in this command, it’s
only displayed in the config.
Finally, notice that each entry is given a
number indicating the order.
I configured the DENY statement first, and
it was assigned 10, then the PERMIT statement
was assigned 20.
Remember, the order of these entries is very
important.
If the PERMIT ANY entry was first, all traffic
would be permitted and the DENY 1.1.1.1 entry
would be useless.
On modern devices, the router should prevent
you from doing configurations like that, but
you should still be aware of how important
the order is.
Okay, next I used the command SHOW IP ACCESS-LISTS.
Notice that the output is exactly the same
as for SHOW ACCESS-LISTS.
As you saw before, there are many kinds of
ACLs.
SHOW ACCESS-LISTS displays all kinds, but
SHOW IP ACCESS-LISTS displays only IP ACLs,
the kind we will be configuring in these videos.
You can use either command to check your ACLs,
it doesn’t matter.
Finally, I used SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG, followed
by the pipe, and then INCLUDE ACCESS-LIST
to only show lines in the config that include
ACCESS-LIST.
Notice once again that the deny and permit
entries were automatically changed by the
router.
Also, the remark is displayed this time.
Now, remember I said you have to actually
apply the ACL to an interface?
Here is the command.
From interface config mode, use IP ACCESS-GROUP,
that’s right, it’s ACCESS-GROUP, not ACCESS-LIST,
then the ACL number, then IN or OUT.
Now let’s get into a real example of using
these configurations, that should help you
understand.
Here’s the same network as before.
I’ll give some requirements, and we’ll
use ACLs to restrict the traffic to fulfill
those requirements.
On R1 I’ll configure standard numbered ACLs
as I just showed you, then I’ll introduce
standard named ACLs and we’ll configure
them on R2, so you can see how to configure
both types.
Okay, first here are some requirements which
we can achieve by configuring an ACL on R1.
PC1 should be able to access the 192.168.2.0/24
network, but other PCs in 192.168.1.0/24 shouldn’t
be able to access 192.168.2.0/24.
So, here’s how I configured and applied
an ACL to fulfill these requirements.
First, I configured ACL 1 with an entry permitting
192.168.1.1/32.
That will achieve the first requirement, allowing
PC1 to access 192.168.2.0/24.
Then I configured an entry denying the 192.168.1.0/24
network.
This will fulfill the second requirement.
The order of these is very important.
If I denied 192.168.1.0/24 first, PC1 would
not be able to access 192.168.2.0/24, even
if I put an entry permitting PC1 after the
deny entry.
Remember, ACLs are processed in order from
top to bottom.
Once a match is found, the action is taken
and any remaining entries after the matching
entry are not processed, they are ignored.
Finally, I configured a permit any entry at
the end.
Remember the implicit deny that is hidden
at the end of every ACL.
If I don’t include this permit any at the
end, the ACL won’t only block PCs in the
192.168.1.0/24 network, it will block all
other traffic.
The only device that will be able to access
the 192.168.2.0/24 network would be 192.168.1.1,
PC1.
Every single other device would be blocked.
Our requirements don’t tell us to block
all other traffic, so we should insert this
permit any.
Finally I applied the ACL to R1’s G0/2 interface
with IP ACCESS-GROUP 1 OUT.
Why outbound on G0/2?
I could have, for example, applied it inbound
on G0/1.
Well, here’s a good rule-of-thumb for applying
standard ACLs to interfaces.
Standard ACLs should be applied as close to
the destination as possible.
You may be thinking, what do I mean by ‘destination’,
even though standard ACLs only filter by source
IP?
Well, in this case we are trying to control
access to the 192.168.2.0/24 network, so that
is the ‘destination’.
If I applied ACL 1 inbound on R1’s G0/1
interface, it would prevent all PCs in the
subnet except R1 from accessing anything outside
of the local network.
However, if I apply it correctly, outbound
on G0/2, the ACL only controls traffic that
tries to access the 192.168.2.0/24 network.
So, remember this rule-of-thumb.
Standards ACLs should be applied as close
to the destination as possible.
If you don’t do that, you might block more
traffic than you intended.
Now let’s see how that ACL will work.
PC1 tries to ping PC3.
The ping is received by R1.
It doesn’t check the ACL yet, because we
didn’t apply it to the G0/1 interface.
R1 looks up the destination in its routing
table, and sees it’s connected to the G0/2
interface.
However, ACL 1 is applied outbound on G0/2,
so before forwarding the ping it checks ACL
1.
It starts at the top, with entry 10, permit
source IP 192.168.1.1.
The ping’s source is PC1, 192.168.1.1, so
that’s a match.
It will take the action, which is to permit
the packet, so it forwards it to PC3.
PC3 will be able to reply, because there is
no ACL blocking the return path from PC3 to
PC1.
What if PC2 tries to ping PC3?
R1 receives the ping on G0/1, but it doesn’t
check the ACL because it’s not applied to
that interface.
Once again it checks the routing table and
sees that it should forward the packet out
of G0/2, but because ACL 1 is applied outbound
on G0/2 it checks ACL 1 first.
It checks the top entry first, permit 192.168.1.1/32.
The source of the ping is 192.168.1.2, so
it doesn’t match.
Then it checks the next entry, deny 192.168.1.0/24.
PC2’s IP is in this subnet, so it matches
this entry and R1 takes the action, which
is to deny.
It won’t forward the ping to PC3.
Okay, now let’s move on to standard named
ACLs.
Standard named ACLs are still standard ACLs,
so they match traffic based only on the source
IP address of the packet.
However, instead of a number they are identified
with a name.
You could, for example, name the ACL ‘BLOCK_BOB’.
Standard named ACLs are configured by entering
‘standard named ACL config mode’, and
then configuring each entry within that mode.
So, a little different than standard numbered
ACLs.
Here’s how you enter that config mode, IP
ACCESS-LIST STANDARD, followed by the name.
Remember to use IP in front of the command.
For standard numbered ACLs the command is
ACCESS-LIST, but in this case it’s IP ACCESS-LIST.
Then you enter standard named ACL config mode
and configure the deny and permit entries.
Note that you can now specify an entry number
before each entry, although you don’t have
to.
If you don’t entries will be numbered 10,
then 20, then 30, etc, just like in the standard
numbered ACLs we configured.
Each entry’s number will be 10 more than
the previous one.
But with this function, you can manually specify
the entry number to control the order of the
entries.
So, here’s an example.
First I create the ACL BLOCK_BOB and enter
standard named ACL config mode.
Then I configured a statement denying 1.1.1.1/32.
Note that I manually configured the entry
number of 5, instead of the default of 10.
Then I configured a permit any entry, with
an entry number of 10.
I then configured a remark.
This isn’t necessary, of course, but remarks
can be helpful when looking at the configuration
later.
Then I moved to interface configuration mode,
and applied the ACL in the same way as before,
IP ACCESS-GROUP, ACL name, and then IN or
OUT.
Let’s check with some show commands.
Once again, I used SHOW ACCESS-LISTS.
The ACL is shown, and you can see each entry
with the entry numbers I manually configured.
Then I checked the running config.
Notice I used a different method of filtering
the output, SECTION ACCESS-LIST.
This displays just the ACL section of the
running config.
If I used ‘INCLUDE ACCESS-LIST’ like before,
it would display the ACL’s name.
However, it wouldn’t actually display any
of the entries, since those lines of the config
don’t include ACCESS-LIST, even though they
are part of an access list.
When I filter using SECTION, I can view the
whole ACL.
You can see each entry including the remark,
although interestingly the entry numbers are
not displayed in the config.
Okay, let’s try configuring some standard
named ACLs on R2.
So, here are the requirements.
PCs in 192.168.1.0/24 can’t access 10.0.2.0/24.
PC3 can’t access 10.0.1.0/24, but other
PCs in 192.168.2.0/24 can.
PC1 can access 10.0.1.0/24, but other PCs
in 192.168.1.0/24 can’t.
We’ll need two ACLs to do this properly.
If you think you can, try to solve this yourself.
But I’ll show you my solution.
So, we’ll configure one ACL to control access
to 10.0.2.0/24 and apply it outbound on R2’s
G0/2.
Then we’ll configure another ACL to control
access to 10.0.1.0/24 and apply it outbound
on R2’s G0/1.
Here’s how I did that.
Here’s the first ACL, I called it TO_10.0.2.0/24.
First I denied the 192.168.1.0/24 network,
but permitted other traffic.
Then I applied it outbound on G0/2.
So, PC1 and PC2 will be blocked from accessing
SRV2, but PC3 and PC4 will be able to.
Okay, that’s the first ACL.
I called the second ACL TO_10.0.1.0/24.
First I denied PC3, 192.168.2.1.
Then I permitted the rest of the PCs in PC3’s
network.
I then permitted PC1, but denied the other
PCs in PC1’s network.
Then I permitted all other traffic.
Finally I applied the ACL outbound on the
G0/1 interface.
And that’s it.
ACL configuration can be flexible sometimes,
so there are other ways to configure these
ACLs that will work, too.
But this is my solution.
Let’s check those ACLs with SHOW IP ACCESS-LISTS.
Do you notice something strange about the
TO_10.0.1.0/24 ACL?
Look at the sequence numbers.
30, then 10, then 20, then 40, then 50.
And look at the order I configured them.
The sequence numbers match the order I configured
the entries, but their actual order in the
ACL is totally different.
Why is that?
This is a very advanced question about the
internal operations of Cisco IOS and how ACLs
are processed, you definitely won’t find
this on the CCNA exam but let me briefly summarize
it.
The router may re-order the /32 entries, the
entries that match only a single specific
host.
This improves the efficiency of processing
the ACL.
However, it does not change the overall effect
of the ACL.
So, it makes sense for the router to change
the order if it helps the router process it
more efficiently without affecting the outcome.
Note that this is done for both standard named
and standard numbered ACLs, it just didn’t
apply to the simpler examples I showed for
standard numbered ACLs.
Also note that I checked in Packet Tracer,
and Packet Tracer does not do this.
It will simply display the entries in order
of sequence number, as you would expect.
Before finishing up, I’ll just walk through
one more example of an ACL being processed.
PC2 wants to access server 1, so it pings
to test connectivity.
The ping reaches R2, which is directly connected
to SRV1’s network.
However, the TO_10.0.1.0/24 ACL is applied
outbound to G0/1 so R2 will check the packet
against that ACL before forwarding it.
The source is 192.168.1.2, so it doesn’t
match the top entry.
It doesn’t match the next one either, or
the next one.
However, it matches entry 40, because the
source is in the 192.168.1.0/24 network.
So, it denies the packet, it does not forward
it to SRV1.
Okay, let’s review and then move on to the
quiz.
In this video I covered what ACLs are.
They are used to identify and control traffic
in the network.
I introduced ACL logic, how ACLs are processed.
The entries in an ACL are processed from top
to bottom, and once a matching entry is found
the action is taken and the remaining entries
are not processed.
I introduced the ACL types you need to know
for the CCNA.
They are standard ACLs and extended ACLs,
and each of those can be configured as numbered
or named ACLs.
In this video I covered standard ACLs, which
are simple and just match traffic based on
the source IP address of the packet.
I showed two main ways of configuring standard
ACLs, standard numbered ACLs and standard
named ACLs.
They are both just different ways of configuring
standard ACLs.
Standard numbered ACLs are configured like
this, a series of entries configured in global
config mode with the ACCESS-LIST command.
For standard named ACLs, you use the IP ACCESS-LIST
command to enter standard named ACL config
mode, and then configure the entries.
Make sure to watch until the end of today’s
quiz for a bonus question from Boson ExSim,
the best practice exams for the CCNA, CCNP,
and more.
Okay, let’s go to question 1 of the quiz.
Which ACL, when applied outbound on R2’s
G0/1, permits only PC1 and PC4 to access 10.0.1.0/24?
Here are four ACLs, which one fulfills that
requirement?
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is ACL 1.
Entry 10 permits PC1 and entry 20 permits
PC4.
The implicit deny will deny all other traffic.
So, ACL 1 fulfills the requirements, and the
other ACLs do not.
Let’s go to question 2.
Which interface should the following ACL be
applied to, and in which direction, to fulfill
the requirement?
Here’s the ACL, and here’s the requirement.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
Here’s the answer.
The interface should be R2’s G0/2 interface,
and the direction should be outbound.
Remember that rule-of-thumb, standard ACLs
should be applied as close to the destination
as possible.
We are controlling access to 10.0.2.0/24,
so that is the destination.
Therefore the ACL should be applied outbound
on R2’s G0/2.
Let’s go to question 3.
You issue the following commands on R2.
Which statement about the effect of the configurations
is correct?
Here are the configurations on R2.
And here are the options.
A, all traffic will be denied.
B, traffic from the 10.0.0.0/24 network will
be denied.
C, traffic from the 172.16.0.0/24 network
will be denied.
Or D, traffic from the 192.168.0.0/24 network
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is B, traffic from the 10.0.0.0/24
network will be denied.
Each interface can only have one ACL applied
in each direction.
If you apply another ACL to the same interface
in the same direction, it will replace the
previous one.
In this case, the last ACL you applied was
ACL 10, which denies traffic from 10.0.0.0/24,
so B is the correct answer.
Let’s go to question 4.
If this ACL is applied inbound on R1 G0/0,
which PCs will be able to ping SRV2?
A, PC1 and PC2.
B, PC1, PC2, and PC4.
C, PC1 only.
D, all PCs.
Or E, PC3 and PC4 only.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is D, all PCs.
This is because of where the ACL was applied,
inbound on R1’s G0/0 interface.
When the PCs try to ping SRV2, R1 won’t
check the ACL as it sends the pings out of
G0/0.
When the reply from SRV2 arrives on R1’s
G0/0 interface, it will check the ACL.
However, the source of the reply will be SRV2’s
IP of 10.0.2.100, which will be permitted
by the ‘permit any’ at the end of the
ACL.
So, all PCs will be able to successfully ping
SRV2.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
What happens if a packet doesn’t match any
entries of an ACL?
A, the packet will be forwarded to the default
gateway.
B, the packet will be checked using the next
available ACL.
C, the packet will be dropped.
Or D, the action of the most specific match
will be taken.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is C, the packet will be dropped.
Every ACL includes an ‘implicit deny’
at the end which will deny all packets that
don’t match any of the ACL’s entries.
So, C is the correct answer.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
from Boson ExSim for CCNA.
Okay, here's today's Boson ExSim practice
question.
Which of the following statements is true
regarding ACLs?
Select the best answer.
A, ACLs are processed from the least specific
entry to the most specific entry.
B, ACLs are processed from the first entry
in the list to the last entry.
C, ACLs are processed from the last entry
in the list to the first entry.
Or D, ACLs are processed from the most specific
entry in the list to the least specific entry.
Okay, if you just watched the video you should
be able to answer this question.
So, pause the video now to think about the
answer.
Okay, so let's check.
As I mentioned in the video, ACLs are processed
from top to bottom, and what that means is
from first to last.
So, B should be the correct answer.
I'll select B and then click on show answer.
And indeed it is correct.
So, here's Boson's explanation, quite detailed.
You can pause the video now if you want to
read Boson's explanations, and I recommend
you do.
These explanations are one of the great things
about Boson ExSim.
Okay, and there's also a reference to both
the chapter in the official cert guide by
Cisco Press and a link to some Cisco documentation
which is available free online.
Configuring IP Access Lists: Process ACLs.
So, this is another great resource.
Okay, so that's Boson ExSim for the CCNA.
These are the practice exams I used to study
for my CCNA and CCNP, and I really highly
recommend them.
So if you want to get a copy of Boson ExSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video.
Sign up for my mailing list via the link in
the description, and I’ll send you all of
the flashcards and packet tracer lab files
for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Junhong, OJ, Magrathea, TheGunguy,
l33america, Njabulo, Benjamin, Tshepiso, Justin,
Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Apogee, Marko, Flodo,
Daming, Joshua, Jhilmar, Ed, Value, John,
Funnydart, Scott, Hassan, Marek, Velvijaykum,
C Mohd, Mark, Yousif, Sidi, Boson Software,
Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as Channel
failed to load, if this is you please let
me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix
it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, November
21st 2020.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.